---
layout: doc
title: "Malloc"
permalink: malloc
dueDates: "<br>Part 1 due 02/29 11:59pm <br> Part 2 due 03/07 11:59pm"
---

## Introduction

In the past, you have been using `malloc()` to allocate memory on the heap. In this MP, you will be implementing your own version of `malloc()`. So by the end of this MP, you would theoretically be able to use your own malloc to compile and run any C code.

## Overview

You should write your implementations of `calloc()`, `malloc()`, `realloc()`, and `free()` in `alloc.c`. `alloc.c` will be the only file we test.

Don't modify `mreplace.c`, `mcontest.c`, `alloc-contest.c`. Those files create the environment that replaces the standard glibc malloc with your malloc. These files will be used for testing.

Your `malloc()` must allocate heap memory using `sbrk()`. You may not use files, pipes, system shared memory, `mmap()`, a chunk of pre-defined stack memory, other external memory libraries found on the Internet, or any of the various other external sources of memory that exist on modern operating systems.

## A Bad Example

Memory allocation seems like a mystery, but in actuality, we are making a wrapper around the system call [`sbrk()`](http://linux.die.net/man/2/sbrk). Here's a really simple implementation of `malloc()`:

{% highlight c %}
void *malloc(size_t size) {
    return sbrk(size);
}
{% endhighlight %}

As you can see, when we request `size` bytes of memory, we call `sbrk(size)` to increase the heap by `size` bytes. Then, we return a pointer to this memory, and we're done. Simple!

Here is our implementation of `free()`:

{% highlight c %}
void free(void *ptr) {
}
{% endhighlight %}

This is a "correct" way to implement `free()`. However, the obvious drawback with our implementation is that we can't reuse memory after we are done with it. Also, we have yet to implement `realloc()` and `calloc()`. Finally, we also have to check for errors when we call [`sbrk()`](http://linux.die.net/man/2/sbrk).

Despite all of this, this is still a "working" implementation of `malloc()`. So the job of `malloc()` is not really to allocate memory, it is to keep track of the memory we've allocated so that we can reuse it. You will use methods that you've learned in class and practiced in the mini-valgrind lab to do this.

## Testing Your Code

In order to test your solution against the testers, run `./mcontest` with the tester you want. You MUST do this or your code will be run with the glibc implementation!

Example:

{% highlight bash %}
./mcontest part1/tester-1
Memory failed to allocate!
[mcontest]: STATUS: FAILED=(256)
[mcontest]: MAX: 0
[mcontest]: AVG: 0.000000
[mcontest]: TIME: 0.000000
{% endhighlight %}

We've also distributed a bash script `run_all_mcontest.sh` to run all testers.

Here are what each of our error codes mean:

{% highlight bash %}
11: Seg Fault
15: Executed Too Long
139: Seg Fault
256, 512, 768, 1024: various errors in tester-# files
16640: Dynamic linking error
17408: Exceeded Memory Limit (2684354560)
{% endhighlight %}

### Debugging
`./mcontest` runs an optimized version of your code, so you won't be able to
debug with `gdb.` `./mreplace` uses a version of your malloc which is compiled
without optimization, so you can debug with `gdb.` Here's an example, running
tester2 with gdb:

{% highlight bash %}
gdb --args ./mreplace testers_exe/tester-2
{% endhighlight %}

### Real programs
Both `mcontest` and `mreplace` can be used to launch "real" programs (not just the testers). For example:

{% highlight bash %}
# ignore the warning about an invalid terminal, if you get it
./mreplace /usr/bin/less alloc.c
{% endhighlight %}

or

{% highlight bash %}
./mcontest /bin/ls
{% endhighlight %}

There are some programs that might not work correctly under your malloc, for a variety of reasons. If you encounter one, post on piazza!

## Contest

The malloc contest pits your implementations of memory allocating functions against your fellow students. There are a few things to know:

* The test cases provided will be used for grading. We may also use some real linux utilities (like ls).
* The memory limit is 2.500GB.
* To submit your program into the contest, you simply commit to subversion. Your most recent SVN submission will be fetched somewhat frequently.
* We will assign a score to each of the three categories (max heap, average heap, and total time) based on how well your program performs memory management relative to a standard solution.
* You can pick a nickname in `nickname.txt`. You will show up as this name on the contest webpage.
* On the webpage, each test will have either be green, which signifies that you passed the test, or red, which signifies that you failed the test. Clicking on the failed test will give you more details on the error output of the test.
* Your ranking will be determined by summing the following for each testcase: `.6 * max_memory + .2 * avg_memory + .2 * runtime`

**WARNING:** Especially as the deadline approaches, the contest page will refresh slower and slower. There are 400 students, 11 test cases, and up to 30 seconds per test case. It will only retest a student's code if it has been updated, but many more students will be updating their code causing longer waits. Start early, and don't become reliant on the contest page by testing locally!

## Grading, Submission, and Other Details

Please fully read details on [Academic Honesty](https://courses.engr.illinois.edu/cs241/#/overview#integrity). These are shared between all MPs in CS 241.

You will commit your code to the malloc folder in your subversion repository. Remember to only modify `alloc.c`.

Here is the grading breakdown:

* Correctness (75%)
  * Part 1 (25%): tests 1-6 complete successfully - due 02/29 11:59pm
  * Part 2 (50%): tests 1-11 complete successfully - due 03/07 11:59pm
* Performance (25%): Points only awarded if all part 2 testers complete
  successfully - due with part2

There are 11 testcases in total. For part 1 you will be graded using tests 1
through 6. For part 2 you will be graded using tests 1 to 11 (tests 1 through 6
get graded twice).

There are also performance points, which you are only eligible for if you pass
all the testcases. Your malloc will be compared against the `glibc` version of
malloc, and given a performance score as a percentage. For example, if your
malloc is 2 times slower than the `glibc` version of malloc, we will say it
runs in `200%` of the performance of `glibc` malloc. Performance points are
awarded in buckets:

- Better than or equal to 200% of `glibc`: Full 25% awarded.
- 200-300% (exclude 200%, include 300%): 20% awarded.
- 300-400%: 15% awarded.
- 400-500%: 10% awarded.
- 500% and worse: 0% awarded.

So lets work out some scenarios:

* Scenario 1: A student gets tests 1 through 6 working for part1 and misses 2
  tests on part2. Then they get all of the correctness points for part1, 9/11
  of the correctness points for part2 and none of the performance points. Thus
  this student will receive a `(6 / 6) * 25 + (9 / 11) * 50 + 0 = 65.90%`.
* Scenario 2: A student gets none of the tests working for part1 and gets
  everything working for part2 and beats `glibc`. Then they get none of the
  correctness points for part1, 11/11 of the correctness points for part2, and
  the performance points. This student will receive a
  `(0 / 6) * 25 + (11 / 11) * 50 + 25 = 75.00%`.
* Scenario 3: A student gets tests 1 through 6 working for part1, then they get
  all the tests expect test 4 working for part2. Then they get all of the
  correctness points for part1, 10/11 of the correctness points for part2, but
  they will not receive any of the performance points. This student will
  receive a `(6 / 6) * 25 + (10 / 11) * 50 + 0 = 70.45%`.
* Scenario 4: A student gets tests 1 through 6 working for part1, then they get
  all of the tests working for part2, but they never can only get to `350%` of
  `glibc`. In this case, they get all of the correctness points for part 1, all
  of the correctness points for part 2, but only 15% performance points. So,
  they get `(6 / 6) * 25 + (11 / 11) * 50 + 15 = 89`
